<!-- Project Title

Reward Dependency Intelligence System
A Causal Approach to Incentive Optimization in Rewarded User Acquisition Platforms

Problem Statement

Rewarded user acquisition platforms rely on monetary incentives to drive user engagement and advertiser conversions.

However, not all users respond to rewards in the same way.

Some users remain engaged regardless of reward levels, while others participate solely because of incentives.

Current reward structures often apply the same reward logic across large user groups, leading to:

Excessive reward spending
Reduced profit margins
Inflated retention metrics
Difficulty identifying genuinely valuable users
Lower advertiser ROI

The challenge is determining:

Which users can receive lower rewards without negatively impacting retention and engagement?

Business Impact

For platforms such as Almedia, reward payouts represent a significant operational cost.

Even small improvements in reward allocation can generate substantial savings.

This system aims to:

Reduce Incentive Spend

Identify users who can maintain engagement with lower reward levels.

Improve Profitability

Decrease unnecessary reward payouts while preserving advertiser revenue.

Increase Advertiser ROI

Prioritize genuinely engaged users rather than purely reward-driven users.

Support Smarter Experimentation

Provide a foundation for future uplift modelling and causal inference experiments.

Improve User Segmentation

Move beyond traditional retention metrics and classify users based on reward dependency behavior.

Proposed Solution

The Reward Dependency Intelligence System estimates how dependent individual users are on rewards and simulates the impact of reward reductions.

The system:

Generates user-level dependency profiles
Simulates reward reduction scenarios
Predicts retention impact
Calculates potential cost savings
Recommends optimized reward amounts

Assumptions

Since production data is unavailable, the project uses a realistic synthetic dataset designed to mimic a rewarded user acquisition platform.

Key assumptions include:

User Segments

Users belong to one of three behavioral groups:

Genuine Gamers
Casual Users
Reward Hunters
Reward Dependency

Higher dependency scores indicate stronger reliance on incentives.

Reward Reduction Effects

Users with lower dependency scores are less sensitive to reward reductions.

Advertiser Economics

Advertisers generate payouts proportional to user engagement and retention.

Retention Behavior

Retention decreases as rewards are reduced, with stronger effects among highly dependent users.

Dataset

Synthetic dataset containing:

User Information
User ID
Country
Device Type
Acquisition Source
Engagement Metrics
Session Duration
Offers Completed
Retention (30-Day)
Reward Metrics
Current Reward Amount
Reward Dependency Score
Simulated Reward Reduction Levels
Business Metrics
Advertiser Payout
User Revenue
Profit Contribution
Experimental Variables
Retention After 20% Reward Reduction
Retention After 40% Reward Reduction

Dataset Size:

100,000 users
17 features

Methodology
Phase 1 — Behavioral Segmentation

Users are categorized into:

Genuine Gamers
Casual Users
Reward Hunters

based on engagement patterns and reward behavior.

Phase 2 — Dependency Estimation

A Reward Dependency Score (0–100) is assigned to each user.

0   = Intrinsically Engaged
100 = Highly Reward Dependent

Phase 3 — Reward Optimization

The system evaluates:

Current reward amount
Dependency score
Simulated retention impact

and recommends:

KEEP
REDUCE 20%
REDUCE 40%

Metrics
Financial Metrics
Total Reward Spend

Amount paid to users.

Suggested Reward Spend

Estimated spend after optimization.

Estimated Savings

Potential reduction in reward payouts.

Savings Percentage

Percentage reduction in total reward spend.

User Metrics
Retention Rate

Percentage of users retained.

Reward Dependency Score

Average dependency score across users.

High Dependency User Share

Percentage of users classified as reward-dependent.

Business Metrics
Profit

Advertiser Revenue − Reward Cost

Return on Incentive Spend (ROIS)
ROIS = Revenue Generated / Reward Cost
Cost per Retained User
Reward Spend / Retained Users
Initial Findings

Using the synthetic dataset:

Total Users: 100,000

Current Reward Spend: €1.11M

Total Profit: €81K

High Dependency Users: 24,405

Potential Reward Waste: €512K

These findings suggest significant opportunity for reward optimization through dependency-aware incentive allocation.

Future Improvements
Uplift Modelling
Causal Inference Framework
Real-Time Reward Optimization
Reinforcement Learning Based Incentive Allocation
Advertiser-Specific Reward Strategies
Dynamic Experiment Generation
A/B Testing Recommendation Engine
Key Question

How much reward spend can be reduced while maintaining user retention and advertiser value?

This project aims to provide a data-driven answer to that question. -->

Reward Optimizer Summary

Current Reward Spend: €1,114,378.71
Suggested Reward Spend: €957,817.87
Estimated Savings: €156,560.84
Savings Percentage: 14.05%

Recommendation Breakdown:
REDUCE_40: 39,645 users
REDUCE_20: 35,132 users
KEEP: 25,223 users